    10.1.  Neighbor states

        The state of a neighbor (really, the state of a conversation
        being held with a neighboring router) is documented in the
        following sections.  The states are listed in order of
        progressing functionality.  For example, the inoperative state
        is listed first, followed by a list of intermediate states
        before the final, fully functional state is achieved.  The
        specification makes use of this ordering by sometimes making
        references such as "those neighbors/adjacencies in state greater
        than X".  Figures 12 and 13 show the graph of neighbor state
        changes.  The arcs of the graphs are labelled with the event
        causing the state change.  The neighbor events are documented in
        Section 10.2.

        The graph in Figure 12 shows the state changes effected by the
        Hello Protocol.  The Hello Protocol is responsible for neighbor
        acquisition and maintenance, and for ensuring two way
        communication between neighbors.

        The graph in Figure 13 shows the forming of an adjacency.  Not
        every two neighboring routers become adjacent (see Section
        10.4).  The adjacency starts to form when the neighbor is in
        state ExStart.  After the two routers discover their
        master/slave status, the state transitions to Exchange.  At this
        point the neighbor starts to be used in the flooding procedure,
        and the two neighboring routers begin synchronizing their
        databases.  When this synchronization is finished, the neighbor
        is in state Full and we say that the two routers are fully
        adjacent.  At this point the adjacency is listed in LSAs.

        For a more detailed description of neighbor state changes,
        together with the additional actions involved in each change,
        see Section 10.3.


        Down
            This is the initial state of a neighbor conversation.  It
            indicates that there has been no recent information received
            from the neighbor.  On NBMA networks, Hello packets may
            still be sent to "Down" neighbors, although at a reduced
            frequency (see Section 9.5.1).

                                   +----+
                                   |Down|
                                   +----+
                                     |\
                                     | \Start
                                     |  \      +-------+
                             Hello   |   +---->|Attempt|
                            Received |         +-------+
                                     |             |
                             +----+<-+             |HelloReceived
                             |Init|<---------------+
                             +----+<--------+
                                |           |
                                |2-Way      |1-Way
                                |Received   |Received
                                |           |
              +-------+         |        +-----+
              |ExStart|<--------+------->|2-Way|
              +-------+                  +-----+

              Figure 12: Neighbor state changes (Hello Protocol)

                  In addition to the state transitions pictured,
                  Event KillNbr always forces Down State,
                  Event InactivityTimer always forces Down State,
                  Event LLDown always forces Down State















                                  +-------+
                                  |ExStart|
                                  +-------+
                                    |
                     NegotiationDone|
                                    +->+--------+
                                       |Exchange|
                                    +--+--------+
                                    |
                            Exchange|
                              Done  |
                    +----+          |      +-------+
                    |Full|<---------+----->|Loading|
                    +----+<-+              +-------+
                            |  LoadingDone     |
                            +------------------+

            Figure 13: Neighbor state changes (Database Exchange)

                In addition to the state transitions pictured,
                Event SeqNumberMismatch forces ExStart state,
                Event BadLSReq forces ExStart state,
                Event 1-Way forces Init state,
                Event KillNbr always forces Down State,
                Event InactivityTimer always forces Down State,
                Event LLDown always forces Down State,
                Event AdjOK? leads to adjacency forming/breaking

        Attempt
            This state is only valid for neighbors attached to NBMA
            networks.  It indicates that no recent information has been
            received from the neighbor, but that a more concerted effort
            should be made to contact the neighbor.  This is done by
            sending the neighbor Hello packets at intervals of
            HelloInterval (see Section 9.5.1).

        Init
            In this state, an Hello packet has recently been seen from
            the neighbor.  However, bidirectional communication has not
            yet been established with the neighbor (i.e., the router
            itself did not appear in the neighbor's Hello packet).  All

            neighbors in this state (or higher) are listed in the Hello
            packets sent from the associated interface.

        2-Way
            In this state, communication between the two routers is
            bidirectional.  This has been assured by the operation of
            the Hello Protocol.  This is the most advanced state short
            of beginning adjacency establishment.  The (Backup)
            Designated Router is selected from the set of neighbors in
            state 2-Way or greater.

        ExStart
            This is the first step in creating an adjacency between the
            two neighboring routers.  The goal of this step is to decide
            which router is the master, and to decide upon the initial
            DD sequence number.  Neighbor conversations in this state or
            greater are called adjacencies.

        Exchange
            In this state the router is describing its entire link state
            database by sending Database Description packets to the
            neighbor.  Each Database Description Packet has a DD
            sequence number, and is explicitly acknowledged.  Only one
            Database Description Packet is allowed outstanding at any
            one time.  In this state, Link State Request Packets may
            also be sent asking for the neighbor's more recent LSAs.
            All adjacencies in Exchange state or greater are used by the
            flooding procedure.  In fact, these adjacencies are fully
            capable of transmitting and receiving all types of OSPF
            routing protocol packets.

        Loading
            In this state, Link State Request packets are sent to the
            neighbor asking for the more recent LSAs that have been
            discovered (but not yet received) in the Exchange state.

        Full
            In this state, the neighboring routers are fully adjacent.
            These adjacencies will now appear in router-LSAs and
            network-LSAs.


    10.2.  Events causing neighbor state changes

        State changes can be effected by a number of events.  These
        events are shown in the labels of the arcs in Figures 12 and 13.
        The label definitions are as follows:


        HelloReceived
            An Hello packet has been received from the neighbor.

        Start
            This is an indication that Hello Packets should now be sent
            to the neighbor at intervals of HelloInterval seconds.  This
            event is generated only for neighbors associated with NBMA
            networks.

        2-WayReceived
            Bidirectional communication has been realized between the
            two neighboring routers.  This is indicated by the router
            seeing itself in the neighbor's Hello packet.

        NegotiationDone
            The Master/Slave relationship has been negotiated, and DD
            sequence numbers have been exchanged.  This signals the
            start of the sending/receiving of Database Description
            packets.  For more information on the generation of this
            event, consult Section 10.8.

        ExchangeDone
            Both routers have successfully transmitted a full sequence
            of Database Description packets.  Each router now knows what
            parts of its link state database are out of date.  For more
            information on the generation of this event, consult Section
            10.8.

        BadLSReq
            A Link State Request has been received for an LSA not
            contained in the database.  This indicates an error in the
            Database Exchange process.

        Loading Done
            Link State Updates have been received for all out-of-date
            portions of the database.  This is indicated by the Link
            state request list becoming empty after the Database
            Exchange process has completed.

        AdjOK?
            A decision must be made as to whether an adjacency should be
            established/maintained with the neighbor.  This event will
            start some adjacencies forming, and destroy others.


        The following events cause well developed neighbors to revert to
        lesser states.  Unlike the above events, these events may occur
        when the neighbor conversation is in any of a number of states.


        SeqNumberMismatch
            A Database Description packet has been received that either
            a) has an unexpected DD sequence number, b) unexpectedly has
            the Init bit set or c) has an Options field differing from
            the last Options field received in a Database Description
            packet.  Any of these conditions indicate that some error
            has occurred during adjacency establishment.

        1-Way
            An Hello packet has been received from the neighbor, in
            which the router is not mentioned.  This indicates that
            communication with the neighbor is not bidirectional.

        KillNbr
            This  is  an  indication that  all  communication  with  the
            neighbor  is now  impossible,  forcing  the  neighbor  to
            revert  to  Down  state.

        InactivityTimer
            The inactivity Timer has fired.  This means that no Hello
            packets have been seen recently from the neighbor.  The
            neighbor reverts to Down state.

        LLDown
            This is an indication from the lower level protocols that
            the neighbor is now unreachable.  For example, on an X.25
            network this could be indicated by an X.25 clear indication
            with appropriate cause and diagnostic fields.  This event
            forces the neighbor into Down state.


    10.3.  The Neighbor state machine

        A detailed description of the neighbor state changes follows.
        Each state change is invoked by an event (Section 10.2).  This
        event may produce different effects, depending on the current
        state of the neighbor.  For this reason, the state machine below
        is organized by current neighbor state and received event.  Each
        entry in the state machine describes the resulting new neighbor
        state and the required set of additional actions.

        When a neighbor's state changes, it may be necessary to rerun
        the Designated Router election algorithm.  This is determined by
        whether the interface NeighborChange event is generated (see
        Section 9.2).  Also, if the Interface is in DR state (the router
        is itself Designated Router), changes in neighbor state may
        cause a new network-LSA to be originated (see Section 12.4).

        When the neighbor state machine needs to invoke the interface
        state machine, it should be done as a scheduled task (see
        Section 4.4).  This simplifies things, by ensuring that neither
        state machine will be executed recursively.


         State(s):  Down

            Event:  Start

        New state:  Attempt

           Action:  Send an Hello Packet to the neighbor (this neighbor
                    is always associated with an NBMA network) and start
                    the Inactivity Timer for the neighbor.  The timer's
                    later firing would indicate that communication with
                    the neighbor was not attained.


         State(s):  Attempt

            Event:  HelloReceived

        New state:  Init

           Action:  Restart the Inactivity Timer for the neighbor, since
                    the neighbor has now been heard from.


         State(s):  Down

            Event:  HelloReceived

        New state:  Init

           Action:  Start the Inactivity Timer for the neighbor.  The
                    timer's later firing would indicate that the
                    neighbor is dead.


         State(s):  Init or greater

            Event:  HelloReceived

        New state:  No state change.

           Action:  Restart the Inactivity Timer for the neighbor, since
                    the neighbor has again been heard from.


         State(s):  Init

            Event:  2-WayReceived

        New state:  Depends upon action routine.

           Action:  Determine whether an adjacency should be established
                    with the neighbor (see Section 10.4).  If not, the
                    new neighbor state is 2-Way.

                    Otherwise (an adjacency should be established) the
                    neighbor state transitions to ExStart.  Upon
                    entering this state, the router increments the DD
                    sequence number in the neighbor data structure.  If
                    this is the first time that an adjacency has been
                    attempted, the DD sequence number should be assigned
                    some unique value (like the time of day clock).  It
                    then declares itself master (sets the master/slave
                    bit to master), and starts sending Database
                    Description Packets, with the initialize (I), more
                    (M) and master (MS) bits set.  This Database
                    Description Packet should be otherwise empty.  This
                    Database Description Packet should be retransmitted
                    at intervals of RxmtInterval until the next state is
                    entered (see Section 10.8).


         State(s):  ExStart

            Event:  NegotiationDone

        New state:  Exchange

           Action:  The router must list the contents of its entire area
                    link state database in the neighbor Database summary
                    list.  The area link state database consists of the
                    router-LSAs, network-LSAs and summary-LSAs contained
                    in the area structure, along with the AS-external-
                    LSAs contained in the global structure.  AS-
                    external-LSAs are omitted from a virtual neighbor's
                    Database summary list.  AS-external-LSAs are omitted
                    from the Database summary list if the area has been
                    configured as a stub (see Section 3.6).  LSAs whose
                    age is equal to MaxAge are instead added to the
                    neighbor's Link state retransmission list.  A
                    summary of the Database summary list will be sent to
                    the neighbor in Database Description packets.  Each
                    Database Description Packet has a DD sequence
                    number, and is explicitly acknowledged.  Only one
                    Database Description Packet is allowed outstanding
                    at any one time.  For more detail on the sending and
                    receiving of Database Description packets, see
                    Sections 10.8 and 10.6.


         State(s):  Exchange

            Event:  ExchangeDone

        New state:  Depends upon action routine.

           Action:  If the neighbor Link state request list is empty,
                    the new neighbor state is Full.  No other action is
                    required.  This is an adjacency's final state.

                    Otherwise, the new neighbor state is Loading.  Start
                    (or continue) sending Link State Request packets to
                    the neighbor (see Section 10.9).  These are requests
                    for the neighbor's more recent LSAs (which were
                    discovered but not yet received in the Exchange
                    state).  These LSAs are listed in the Link state
                    request list associated with the neighbor.


         State(s):  Loading

            Event:  Loading Done

        New state:  Full

           Action:  No action required.  This is an adjacency's final
                    state.


         State(s):  2-Way

            Event:  AdjOK?

        New state:  Depends upon action routine.

           Action:  Determine whether an adjacency should be formed with
                    the neighboring router (see Section 10.4).  If not,
                    the neighbor state remains at 2-Way.  Otherwise,
                    transition the neighbor state to ExStart and perform
                    the actions associated with the above state machine
                    entry for state Init and event 2-WayReceived.

         State(s):  ExStart or greater

            Event:  AdjOK?

        New state:  Depends upon action routine.

           Action:  Determine whether the neighboring router should
                    still be adjacent.  If yes, there is no state change
                    and no further action is necessary.

                    Otherwise, the (possibly partially formed) adjacency
                    must be destroyed.  The neighbor state transitions
                    to 2-Way.  The Link state retransmission list,
                    Database summary list and Link state request list
                    are cleared of LSAs.


         State(s):  Exchange or greater

            Event:  SeqNumberMismatch

        New state:  ExStart

           Action:  The (possibly partially formed) adjacency is torn
                    down, and then an attempt is made at
                    reestablishment.  The neighbor state first
                    transitions to ExStart.  The Link state
                    retransmission list, Database summary list and Link
                    state request list are cleared of LSAs.  Then the
                    router increments the DD sequence number in the
                    neighbor data structure, declares itself master
                    (sets the master/slave bit to master), and starts
                    sending Database Description Packets, with the
                    initialize (I), more (M) and master (MS) bits set.
                    This Database Description Packet should be otherwise
                    empty (see Section 10.8).


         State(s):  Exchange or greater

            Event:  BadLSReq

        New state:  ExStart

           Action:  The action for event BadLSReq is exactly the same as
                    for the neighbor event SeqNumberMismatch.  The
                    (possibly partially formed) adjacency is torn down,
                    and then an attempt is made at reestablishment.  For
                    more information, see the neighbor state machine
                    entry that is invoked when event SeqNumberMismatch
                    is generated in state Exchange or greater.


         State(s):  Any state

            Event:  KillNbr

        New state:  Down

           Action:  The Link state retransmission list, Database summary
                    list and Link state request list are cleared of
                    LSAs.  Also, the Inactivity Timer is disabled.


         State(s):  Any state

            Event:  LLDown

        New state:  Down

           Action:  The Link state retransmission list, Database summary
                    list and Link state request list are cleared of
                    LSAs.  Also, the Inactivity Timer is disabled.


         State(s):  Any state

            Event:  InactivityTimer

        New state:  Down

           Action:  The Link state retransmission list, Database summary
                    list and Link state request list are cleared of
                    LSAs.
                    
         State(s):  2-Way or greater

            Event:  1-WayReceived

        New state:  Init

           Action:  The Link state retransmission list, Database summary
                    list and Link state request list are cleared of
                    LSAs.


         State(s):  2-Way or greater

            Event:  2-WayReceived

        New state:  No state change.

           Action:  No action required.


         State(s):  Init

            Event:  1-WayReceived

        New state:  No state change.

           Action:  No action required.


    10.4.  Whether to become adjacent

        Adjacencies are established with some subset of the router's
        neighbors.  Routers connected by point-to-point networks,
        Point-to-MultiPoint networks and virtual links always become
        adjacent.  On broadcast and NBMA networks, all routers become
        adjacent to both the Designated Router and the Backup Designated
        Router.

        The adjacency-forming decision occurs in two places in the
        neighbor state machine.  First, when bidirectional communication
        is initially established with the neighbor, and secondly, when
        the identity of the attached network's (Backup) Designated
        Router changes.  If the decision is made to not attempt an
        adjacency, the state of the neighbor communication stops at 2-
        Way.

        An adjacency should be established with a bidirectional neighbor
        when at least one of the following conditions holds:


        o   The underlying network type is point-to-point

        o   The underlying network type is Point-to-MultiPoint

        o   The underlying network type is virtual link

        o   The router itself is the Designated Router

        o   The router itself is the Backup Designated Router

        o   The neighboring router is the Designated Router

        o   The neighboring router is the Backup Designated Router